figment-learn/new-pathways/solana/solana-setup.md, before:

# Requirements

Make sure you've installed the [Solana CLI](https://docs.solana.com/cli/install-solana-cli-tools)'s latest release.

> **Windows Users:** There are known compatibility issues with the Solana BPF toolchain. You will need to use the Windows Subsystem for Linux. Please refer to the [installation guide](https://docs.figment.io/network-documentation/extra-guides/solana-setup-for-windows) we have provided. 
>
> **macOS Users:** If you are using any of the Apple Silicon products (M1 processor), you may need to build from source. [Refer to this GitHub PR for more information](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/16346/).

---------------------------

# Set your DataHub API key

Create an `.env.local` file at the root of the directory by copying the existing `.env.example` file with the terminal command
`cp .env.example .env.local`.

The value for `DATAHUB_SOLANA_API_KEY` can be found on the [DataHub Services Dashboard](https://datahub.figment.io/services/solana). Click on the Solana icon in the list of available protocols and then copy your key as shown below. You can now paste your personal API key into `.env.local`. This will authenticate you and enable you to make JSON-RPC requests to the Solana cluster via DataHub.

![](../../../.gitbook/assets/solana-setup-00.gif)

{% hint style="info" %}
[**Join us on Discord**](https://figment.io/devchat), if you encounter any issues with the tutorial or have any questions!
{% endhint %}

# Using a Test Validator

At some point it may be useful to run a Test Validator. For example, if can't get airdrops because the Devnet faucet is not working. To run a local Test Validator, use this command in its own terminal tab or window :

```text
solana-test-validator
``` 

Use `solana config set` to target a particular cluster. After setting a cluster target, any future subcommands will send/receive information from that cluster. To target a running Test Validator with the Solana CLI:

```text
solana config set --url https://localhost:8899
```

You can see which cluster the Solana command-line tool (CLI) is currently targeting and the paths to your keypair and configuration file with the command :

```text
solana config get
```

---------------------------

# Keypair storage

During the Pathway, you will need to generate a keypair for use in the tutorials. This information is kept in the localstorage of your web browser, and is distinct from any keypairs generated by the Solana CLI. It can be accessed or cleared via the "Keychain" button at the top right corner of the Pathway UI, as shown below:

![](../../../.gitbook/assets/pathways/solana/solana-localstorage.png)

---------------------------

# Next

You can now move ahead to the instructions of the first tutorial step by clicking on the "Next: Connect to Solana" button below on the right.

You may also continue reading for a brief introduction to Solana before continuing with the Pathway, if you would like to know more. 

---------------------------

# What is Solana?

Solana is an open-source project implementing a new, high-performance, permissionless blockchain. The Solana Foundation is based in Geneva, Switzerland and maintains the open-source project. Its goal is to provide a platform that enables developers to create DApps without needing to design around performance bottlenecks. Solana features a new timestamp system called Proof-of-History (PoH) that enables automatically ordered transactions. It also uses a Proof of Stake (PoS) consensus algorithm to help secure the network. Additional design goals include sub-second settlement times, low transaction costs, and support for all LLVM compatible smart contract languages.

# What can you build on Solana?

Solana offers a highly scalable platform for Web 3 applications which can now unlock mainstream usage. There are already over 150 projects live on Solana, with a majority of DeFi projects, although NFTs, social apps, and games are starting to launch on the network.

# The Solana network

* **Transaction Fees** The network Cluster sets transaction fees based on recent processing history. Transaction fees on Solana are estimated at $10 for 1 million transactions.
* **Transaction Speed & Finality** : Solana can manage up to 65,000 transactions per second and block times at 400ms. This makes Solana one of the fastest production blockchain available, and 4,000 times faster than Ethereum.
* **Languages supported** : Solana programs are built using Rust, but Solana also supports C and C++.
* **EVM compatibility** : Solana is not EVM compatible but it offers [a bidirectional token bridge](https://solana.com/wormhole) between Solana and Ethereum so projects can move tokenized assets across blockchains.
* **Role of the SOL token** : The token is used to pay for the transaction fees in the network and to reward participant in the Proof of Stake consensus 

# Gentle introduction to Solana

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/xiJEESddB5A" caption="Say Hello to Solana" %}

{% embed url="https://youtu.be/4dNuMXBjpr0" caption="Solana Core Concepts (Community Video)" %}

Commit message:

Pathway fixes
- Remove duplicated .env instructions
- Link to -101.md files rather than include them directly

figment-learn/new-pathways/solana/solana-setup.md, after:

# Requirements

Make sure you've installed the [Solana CLI](https://docs.solana.com/cli/install-solana-cli-tools)'s latest release.

> **Windows Users:** There are known compatibility issues with the Solana BPF toolchain. You will need to use the Windows Subsystem for Linux. Please refer to the [installation guide](https://docs.figment.io/network-documentation/extra-guides/solana-setup-for-windows) we have provided. 
>
> **macOS Users:** If you are using any of the Apple Silicon products (M1 processor), you may need to build from source. [Refer to this GitHub PR for more information](https://github.com/solana-labs/solana/pull/16346/).

---------------------------

# Set your DataHub API key

The value for `DATAHUB_SOLANA_API_KEY` can be found on the [DataHub Services Dashboard](https://datahub.figment.io/services/solana). Click on the Solana icon in the list of available protocols and then copy your key as shown below. You can now paste your personal API key into `.env.local`. This will authenticate you and enable you to make JSON-RPC requests to the Solana cluster via DataHub.

![](../../../.gitbook/assets/solana-setup-00.gif)

{% hint style="info" %}
[**Join us on Discord**](https://figment.io/devchat), if you encounter any issues with the tutorial or have any questions!
{% endhint %}

# Using a Test Validator

At some point it may be useful to run a Test Validator. For example, if can't get airdrops because the Devnet faucet is not working. To run a local Test Validator, use this command in its own terminal tab or window :

```text
solana-test-validator
``` 

Use `solana config set` to target a particular cluster. After setting a cluster target, any future subcommands will send/receive information from that cluster. To target a running Test Validator with the Solana CLI:

```text
solana config set --url https://localhost:8899
```

You can see which cluster the Solana command-line tool (CLI) is currently targeting and the paths to your keypair and configuration file with the command :

```text
solana config get
```

---------------------------

# Keypair storage

During the Pathway, you will need to generate a keypair for use in the tutorials. This information is kept in the localstorage of your web browser, and is distinct from any keypairs generated by the Solana CLI. It can be accessed or cleared via the "Keychain" button at the top right corner of the Pathway UI, as shown below:

![](../../../.gitbook/assets/pathways/solana/solana-localstorage.png)

---------------------------

# Next

If you want to know more about Solana, [check out this brief introduction](./solana-101.md).

Otherwise, you can now move ahead to the instructions of the first tutorial step by clicking on the "**Next: Connect to Solana**" button below on the right.
